Well, earthquakes have been, in the news quite a bit recently, but we're going to read
about an earthquake in Psalm 46, which describes one that has never happened in recorded history.
Psalm 46, starting with verse 1, says, there, God is our refuge and strength, a help that
is readily found in times of distress. That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes
change, or some translations say, though the earth quakes, though the mountains topple into
the depths of the sea, though its waters roar and foam over, though the mountains rock on
account of its turbulence. Now, there's no evidence that this poetic description of
mountains toppling into the sea literally happened in ancient Israel. But clearly, the
world around the psalma seemed to be collapsing somehow. What catastrophic situation is being
referred to? Well, the watchtower has explained that this psalm seems to fit the time of King
Hezekiah, when Jerusalem was being threatened by Sinacra, the king of Assyria. Now, we know
those threats were not empty. Sinacra had conquered surrounding nations. He had also conquered
the fortified cities around Jerusalem that were protecting the city. He'd actually overrun
the villages right up to Nob, and Nob was within sight of Jerusalem one mile away. And as you
know, Assyria was famous for its cruelty. They found palace walls from Sinacra,
times the shocking scenes of brutality toward conquered peoples. So we can understand why the psalm
has felt the world was collapsing. The description is so ominous and bleak. But suddenly, in verse four,
the tone of the psalm changes completely. There is a river, the streams of which make the city of
God rejoice. The holy Grand Tabernacle of the most high. God is in the city. It cannot be overthrown.
God will come to its aid at the break of dawn. So the psalmist thoughts go from catastrophe and chaos
to peace and confidence. In verse four, speaks about a river in the city of God. There's no river
flowing in Jerusalem. So what is this referring to? Well, some suggest that it refers to Hezekiah's
tunnel that was built in order to bring water into the city. But the poetic structure of the psalm
actually parallels the river to the holy Tabernacle of Jehovah, the holy Tabernacle of the
most high, and the pure worship carried on there. And it's interesting that when Hezekiah
received the threats from Sinacra, the scriptures say at 2 Kings 19 that Hezekiah took the letters
from the Assyrians. He went into the temple. He spread them out before Jehovah and He prayed
fervently. And then Jehovah sent a reassuring message through Isaiah. I have heard your prayer to
me concerning Sinacra king of Assyria. He will not come into the city or shoot an arrow there or
bring a shield or siege rampart against it. Now the sons of Korah who recorded this psalm may have
seen Hezekiah going into the temple and then heard Jehovah's response through Isaiah. And this would
give them complete confidence in the outcome. And we all know what happened next. The huge Assyrian
army was vanquished overnight by an angel. And it could be that verse 5 alludes to this where it says
God will come to its aid at the break of dawn. But what does this psalm teach us? Well, the psalmist
example of focusing on pure worship and his word, which is likened to a river in this psalm,
shows that we can experience peace even when the world around us seems to be collapsing.
The psalmist declared God is in the city. He was its ruler, not Sinacra. For decades, Judah had
been wayward and God was not in Jerusalem. But Hezekiah renovated the temple and restored pure
worship there. That pure worship was like a river of blessing that connected the people to Jehovah
and gave powerful evidence that God was in the city. Our pure worship book associates the river
of Psalm 46 with the river that flowed from Jehovah's sanctuary in Ezekiel's vision.
And you might recall that that river became wider and deeper the further it flowed.
And the pure worship book says about it, like the visionary river that Ezekiel saw,
the flow of pure truce has expanded rapidly. And today the flow of that river includes
Bibles, Bible-based publications and videos in over a thousand languages. Ezekiel said that the river
got so deep that a person had to swim. And for the last five months, you students have felt
like Ezekiel. Your course has immersed you and sometimes taken you underwater. And that was
from the flood of Bible knowledge you received through your study, your lectures, and also the
interaction with the students and also your instructors. And you may have felt like you were
even drowning sometimes. But like Hezekiah and those with them, you've also been in the confines
of a secure city where Jehovah's worship prevails. During these months, the world has been
dealing with the aftermath of the pandemic and wars and other disasters. But you were like the
psalmist. The earth could quake, the mountains could topple, but you enjoyed a special period of
peace because you were focused on that river. Now you're going back out into the trenches with
the rest of us, so to speak. Some of you will serve where there's economic toil,
turmoil or violence or other disasters, or you may personally face health trials, even persecution.
But the lesson of Gilead and the lesson of Psalm 46 can serve you well. When you stay focused on
the river, Jehovah's pure worship, you can remain confident and joyful regardless of what challenges
life brings. An ancient Greek writer said, no man ever steps in the same river twice,
for it's not the same river and he's not the same man. And isn't it true that our lives are
constantly changing and new challenges suddenly crop up? But Jehovah's river of blessings just
keeps flowing and is constantly renewed. It supplies life-giving water in all circumstances.
And this is so even when the figurative mountains of this world are toppling and the world is in chaos.
A sister in the Warzone in Eastern Ukraine wrote,
what we needed most was spiritual food. We were overwhelmed with joy when we received the JW
boxes after the internet failed and spiritual food became available again. Despite many challenges
and difficulties, when we meet with fellow believers our problems are not the main subject of discussion.
More often we share how Jehovah supports us, what has strengthened us and what we're thankful for.
We can sense her calmness. These friends are living examples of how focusing on the river
can preserve our peace even in times of disaster. Now returning to Psalm 46 we can paraphrase verses 8 and
9 which may have occurred when the angel destroyed the Issyrian army. It says, Jehovah has done
astonishing things in the earth, bringing an end to wars, breaking the bow and the spear and
burning the military wagons. We can just imagine the astonishing scene going out into the Issyrian
camp and seeing the entire army devastated. Now what does that mean for us?
Well we hate the war and violence that plagues this world and affects our dear brothers and we
long for it to end. But until then understanding that Jehovah is still in the city, still in control
with this people gives us complete confidence. No humans, no attack of an Issyrian-like government
can stop the flow of that river or shake the city. And the Psalmist concludes in verse 11,
excuse me, with the reassuring echo of verse 1, Jehovah of armies is with us. The God of Jacob
is a secure refuge for us. Well we don't know what your individual future holds after
Gilead, what assignments you'll receive, but you can be confident that Jehovah is in the city,
he's in control. And remember the lesson of Gilead, stay focused on the river. The river that makes
the city of God rejoice, the river that will flow throughout eternity.